404 notifier (#1381)
redpanda-data/documentation: modules/deploy/pages/redpanda/manual/resilience/shadowing.adoc

Shadowing replicates:

* **Topic data**: All records with preserved offsets and timestamps
* **Topic configurations**: Partition counts, retention policies, and other xref:reference:properties/topic-properties.adoc[topic properties]
* **xref:develop:consume-data/consumer-offsets.adoc[Consumer group offsets]**: Enables seamless consumer resumption after failover
* **Access Control Lists (ACLs)**: User permissions and security policies
* **xref:manage:schema-reg/schema-reg-overview.adoc[Schema Registry] data**: Schema definitions and compatibility settings

== How Shadowing fits into disaster recovery

Shadowing addresses enterprise disaster recovery requirements driven by regulatory compliance and business continuity needs. Organizations typically want to minimize both recovery time objective (RTO) and recovery point objective (RPO), and Shadowing asynchronous replication helps you achieve both goals by reducing data loss during regional outages and enabling rapid application recovery.

> The architecture follows an active-standby pattern. The source cluster processes all production traffic while the shadow cluster remains in read-only mode, continuously receiving updates. If a disaster occurs, you can promote the shadow topics using the Admin API or rpk, making them fully writable. At that point, you can redirect your applications to the shadow cluster, which becomes the new production cluster.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The architecture follows an active-standby pattern. The source cluster processes all production traffic while the shadow cluster remains in read-only mode, continuously receiving updates. If a disaster occurs, you can promote the shadow topics using the Admin API or `rpk`, making them fully writable. At that point, you can redirect your applications to the shadow cluster, which becomes the new production cluster.
```

// TODO: insert diagram. Possibly with a .gif animation showing cluster Cluster A being written and cluster B being replicated with a data flow arrow and geo-separation. Diagram must show Icons or labels for topics, configurations, offsets, ACLs, schemas that are being copied

== Limitations

Shadowing is designed for active-passive disaster recovery scenarios. Each shadow cluster can maintain only one shadow link.

Shadowing operates exclusively in asynchronous mode and doesn't support active-active configurations. This means there will always be some replication lag. You cannot write to both clusters simultaneously.

xref:develop:data-transforms/index.adoc[Data transforms] are disabled on shadow clusters while Shadowing is active. During a disaster, xref:manage:audit-logging.adoc[audit log] history from the source cluster is lost, though the shadow cluster begins generating new audit logs immediately after promotion.

> Once you promote shadow topics after a failover, automatic fallback to the original source cluster is not supported. You cannot modify shadow topics through the Kafka API while Shadowing is active.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After you promote shadow topics with a failover, automatic fallback to the original source cluster is not supported. You cannot modify shadow topics through the Kafka API while Shadowing is active.
```

== Prerequisites

=== Licensing and cluster requirements

- You must have xref:get-started:licensing/overview.adoc[Enterprise Edition] licenses on both clusters. 

- Both clusters must run Redpanda version 25.3 or later. The shadow cluster can be one feature release ahead of the source cluster, but cannot skip feature releases. For example, if the source cluster runs version 25.3, the shadow cluster can run 25.3 or 26.1, but not 27.1.

[TIP]
====
Deploy clusters in different geographic regions to protect against regional disasters.
====

=== Administrative access

> Superuser access is required on both clusters through xref:get-started:rpk/index.adoc[rpk], the Admin API, or xref:console:index.adoc[Redpanda Console] to create and manage shadow links.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Superuser access is required on both clusters through xref:get-started:rpk/index.adoc[`rpk`], the Admin API, or xref:console:index.adoc[Redpanda Console] to create and manage shadow links.
```

=== Network and authentication

You must configure network connectivity between clusters with appropriate firewall rules to allow the shadow cluster to connect to the source cluster for data replication. Shadowing uses a pull-based architecture where the shadow cluster fetches data from the source cluster.

If using xref:manage:security/authentication.adoc[authentication] for the shadow link connection, configure the source cluster with your chosen authentication method (SASL/SCRAM, TLS, mTLS) and ensure the shadow cluster has the proper credentials to authenticate to the source cluster.

== Set up Shadowing

Setting up Shadowing involves:

* **Understanding replication behavior**: Review what topic properties, consumer groups, and security settings Redpanda automatically replicates versus what requires explicit configuration
* **Configuring filters**: Define which topics, consumer groups, and ACLs should replicate by creating include/exclude patterns that match your disaster recovery requirements

> * **Creating a shadow link**: Establish the connection between clusters using rpk, the Admin API, or Redpanda Console with authentication and network settings

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To set up Shadowing:

* **Understand replication behavior**: Review what topic properties, consumer groups, and security settings Redpanda automatically replicates versus what requires explicit configuration
* **Configure filters**: Define which topics, consumer groups, and ACLs should replicate by creating include/exclude patterns that match your disaster recovery requirements
* **Create a shadow link**: Establish the connection between clusters using `rpk`, the Admin API, or Redpanda Console with authentication and network settings
```

=== Set filters

Filters control exactly what data Shadowing replicates from your source cluster. You can define filters for topics, consumer groups, security settings, and ACLs to create a targeted disaster recovery scope rather than replicating everything.

==== Filter types and patterns

Each filter uses two key settings:

* **Pattern type**: Determines how names are matched
  - `LITERAL`: Matches names exactly (including the special wildcard `*` to match all items)
  - `PREFIX`: Matches names that start with the specified string
* **Filter type**: Specifies whether to include or exclude matching items
  - `INCLUDE`: Replicate items that match the pattern
  - `EXCLUDE`: Skip items that match the pattern

==== Filter processing rules

Redpanda processes filters in the order you define them and applies the first matching rule. Design your filter lists carefully:

1. **Order matters**: Place more specific filters before general ones
2. **First match wins**: Once a name matches a filter, subsequent filters are ignored for that item

> 3. **Default behavior**: Items that don't match any filter are excluded from replication

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. **Order matters**: Place more specific filters before general ones.
2. **First match wins**: After a name matches a filter, subsequent filters are ignored for that item.
3. **Default behavior**: Items that don't match any filter are excluded from replication.
```

----

==== System topic filtering rules

Redpanda system topics have specific filtering restrictions:

* Literal filters for `__consumer_offsets` and `_redpanda.audit_log` are rejected
* Prefix filters for topics starting with `_redpanda` or `__redpanda` are rejected  
* Wildcard `*` filters will not match topics that start with `_redpanda` or `__redpanda`
* To shadow specific system topics, you must provide explicit literal filters for those individual topics

==== ACL filtering

ACL filters are more complex as they filter based on both resource and access properties:

[,yaml]
----
acl_filters:
  # Include read permissions for production topics
  - resource_filter:
      resource_type: "TOPIC"
      pattern_type: "PREFIX"
      name: "prod-"
    access_filter:
      principal: "User:app-user"
      operation: "READ"
      permission_type: "ALLOW" 
      host: "*"
  # Include consumer group permissions
  - resource_filter:
      resource_type: "GROUP"
      pattern_type: "LITERAL"
      name: "*"
    access_filter:
      principal: "User:app-user" 
      operation: "READ"
      permission_type: "ALLOW"
      host: "*"
----

==== Generate a sample configuration

> Use rpk to generate a sample configuration file with common filter patterns:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use `rpk` to generate a sample configuration file with common filter patterns:
```

[,bash]
----
rpk shadow config generate --output shadow-link-config.yaml
----

This creates a template configuration file that you can customize for your environment.

=== Networking

Configure network connectivity between your source and shadow clusters to enable shadow link replication. The shadow cluster initiates connections to the source cluster using a pull-based architecture.

==== Connection requirements

* **Direction**: Shadow cluster connects to source cluster (outbound from shadow, inbound to source)
* **Protocol**: Kafka protocol over TCP (default port 9092, or your configured listener ports)
* **Persistence**: Connections remain active for continuous replication

==== Firewall configuration

Configure firewall rules to allow the shadow cluster to reach the source cluster:

**On the source cluster network:**
* Allow inbound TCP connections on Kafka listener ports (typically 9092)
* Allow connections from the shadow cluster's IP addresses or subnets

**On the shadow cluster network:**  
* Allow outbound TCP connections to the source cluster's Kafka listener ports

> * Ensure DNS resolution works for source cluster hostnames

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**On the source cluster network:**

* Allow inbound TCP connections on Kafka listener ports (typically 9092).
* Allow connections from the shadow cluster's IP addresses or subnets.

**On the shadow cluster network:**

* Allow outbound TCP connections to the source cluster's Kafka listener ports.
* Ensure DNS resolution works for source cluster hostnames.
```

==== Bootstrap servers

Specify multiple bootstrap servers in your shadow link configuration for high availability:

[,yaml]
----
client_options:
  bootstrap_servers:
    - "source-broker-1.example.com:9092"
    - "source-broker-2.example.com:9092" 
    - "source-broker-3.example.com:9092"
----

The shadow cluster uses these addresses to discover all brokers in the source cluster. If one bootstrap server is unavailable, the shadow cluster tries the next one in the list.

==== Network security

For production deployments, secure the network connection between clusters:

**TLS encryption:**
[,yaml]
----
client_options:
  tls_settings:
    ca_path: "/path/to/ca.crt"
    # Optional client certificates for mTLS
    key_path: "/path/to/client.key" 
    cert_path: "/path/to/client.crt"
----

**Authentication:**
[,yaml]
----
client_options:
  authentication_configuration:
    username: "shadow-replication-user"
    password: "secure-password"
    scram_mechanism: "SCRAM-SHA-256"
----

==== Connection tuning

> Adjust connection parameters based on your network characteristics:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Adjust connection parameters based on your network characteristics. For example:
```

[,yaml]
----
client_options:
  connection_timeout_ms: 1000      # Default 1000ms, increase for high-latency networks
  retry_backoff_ms: 100            # Default 100ms, backoff between connection retries  
  metadata_max_age_ms: 10000       # Default 10000ms, how often to refresh cluster metadata
----

=== Create a shadow link

> You can establish a shadow link using either xref:get-started:rpk/index.adoc[rpk], the Admin API, or xref:console:index.adoc[Redpanda Console]. Run the following rpk command from the shadow cluster to create a shadow link with the source cluster:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can establish a shadow link using either xref:get-started:rpk/index.adoc[`rpk`], the Admin API, or xref:console:index.adoc[Redpanda Console]. For example, to create a shadow link with the source cluster, run the following `rpk` command from the shadow cluster:
```

Reviewer: I don't think we need to link again here to conceptual docs for rpk & Console

  role_filters:                          # Filters for user roles to sync
    - pattern_type: "LITERAL"
      filter_type: "INCLUDE"
      name: "<ROLE_NAME>"                # Examples: "application-user", "read-only"
  scram_cred_filters:                    # Filters for SCRAM credentials to sync
    - pattern_type: "PREFIX"
      filter_type: "EXCLUDE"
      name: "<ADMIN_PREFIX>"             # Examples: "admin-", "root-"
  acl_filters:                           # Filters for ACLs to sync
    - resource_filter:
        resource_type: "TOPIC"           # Resource type: "TOPIC", "GROUP", "CLUSTER"
        pattern_type: "PREFIX"           # Pattern type: "LITERAL", "PREFIX", "PREFIXED"
        name: "<RESOURCE_PATTERN>"       # Examples: "prod-", "app-data-"
      access_filter:
        principal: "User:<USERNAME>"     # Principal name, example: "User:app-service"
        operation: "READ"                # Operation: "READ", "WRITE", "CREATE", "DELETE", "ALTER", "DESCRIBE", "ANY"
        permission_type: "ALLOW"         # Permission: "ALLOW" or "DENY"
        host: "<HOST_PATTERN>"           # Host pattern, examples: "*", "10.0.0.0/8", "app-server.example.com"
----
====

> For the complete reference, see link:/api/doc/admin/[Admin API v2 reference^].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
See also: link:/api/doc/admin/[Admin API v2 reference^]
```

== Failover

Failover is the process of promoting shadow topics or an entire shadow cluster from read-only replicas to fully writable resources. You can fail over individual topics for selective workload migration or fail over the entire cluster for comprehensive disaster recovery. This critical operation transforms your shadow resources into operational production assets, allowing you to redirect application traffic when the source cluster becomes unavailable.

=== Understanding failover behavior

When you initiate failover, Redpanda performs the following operations:

1. **Stops replication**: Halts all data fetching from the source cluster for the specified topics or entire shadow link
2. **Promotes topics**: Converts read-only shadow topics into regular, writable topics
3. **Updates topic state**: Changes topic status from `ACTIVE` to `PROMOTING`, then `PROMOTED`

> The failover process is irreversible. Once topics are promoted, they cannot return to shadow mode, and automatic fallback to the original source cluster is not supported.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The failover process is irreversible. After topics are promoted, they cannot return to shadow mode, and automatic fallback to the original source cluster is not supported.
```

**Operational limitations:**
* No automatic fallback mechanism to the original source cluster
* Data transforms remain disabled until you manually re-enable them
* Audit log history from the source cluster is not available (new audit logs begin immediately)

=== Failover considerations and limitations

**Data consistency:**
* Some data loss may occur due to replication lag at the time of failover
* Consumer group offsets are preserved, allowing applications to resume from their last committed position
* In-flight transactions at the source cluster are not replicated and will be lost

**recovery-point-objective (RPO):**
The amount of potential data loss depends on replication lag when disaster occurs. Monitor lag metrics to understand your effective RPO.

**Network partitions:**
If the source cluster becomes accessible again after failover, do not attempt to write to both clusters simultaneously. This creates a scenario with potential data inconsistencies, since metadata starts to diverge.

**Testing requirements:**
Regularly test failover procedures in non-production environments to validate your disaster recovery processes and measure RTO.

== Monitoring

> Monitoring your shadow links ensures proper replication performance and helps you understand your disaster recovery readiness. Use rpk commands, metrics, and status information to track shadow link health and troubleshoot issues.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Monitor your shadow links to ensure proper replication performance and understand your disaster recovery readiness. Use `rpk` commands, metrics, and status information to track shadow link health and troubleshoot issues.
```

=== Status commands

List existing shadow links:

[,bash]
----
rpk shadow list
----

Check your shadow link status to ensure proper operation:

[,bash]
----
rpk shadow status <my-disaster-recovery-link>
----

This displays replication lag, connection health, and the status of individual synchronization tasks. The status output includes:

* **Shadow link state**: Overall operational state (`ACTIVE` or `PAUSED`)
* **Individual topic states**: Current state of each replicated topic
* **Task status**: Health of replication tasks across brokers
* **Lag information**: Replication lag per partition

[[shadow-link-metrics]]
=== Metrics

Shadowing provides comprehensive metrics to track replication performance and health:

> 

Reviewer: Suggest converting this list into a table to make it easier to read

* `redpanda_shadow_link_client_errors` - The number of errors seen by the client. Track this count metric by `shadow_link_name` and `shard` to identify connection or protocol issues between clusters.

* `redpanda_shadow_link_shadow_topic_state` - Number of shadow topics in the respective states. This gauge metric is labeled by `shadow_link_name` and `state` to monitor topic state distribution across your shadow links.

* `redpanda_shadow_link_total_records_fetched` - The total number of records fetched by the sharded replicator (records received by the client). Monitor this count metric by `shadow_link_name` and `shard` to track message throughput from the source.

* `redpanda_shadow_link_total_records_written` - The total number of records written by a sharded replicator (records written to the write_at_offset_stm). This count metric uses `shadow_link_name` and `shard` labels to monitor message throughput to the shadow cluster.

> For complete metrics reference, see xref:reference:public-metrics-reference.adoc[].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
See also: xref:reference:public-metrics-reference.adoc[]
```

=== Monitoring best practices

==== Health check procedures

Establish regular monitoring workflows to ensure shadow link health:

**Health checks:**
[,bash]
----
# Check all shadow links are active
rpk shadow list | grep -v "ACTIVE" || echo "All shadow links healthy"

# Monitor lag for critical topics  
rpk shadow status <disaster-recovery-link> | grep -E "LAG|Lag"
----

==== Alerting thresholds

Configure monitoring alerts for:

* **High replication lag**: When `redpanda_shadow_link_shadow_lag` exceeds your RPO requirements
* **Connection errors**: When `redpanda_shadow_link_client_errors` increases rapidly
* **Shadow link state changes**: When shadow links move from `ACTIVE` to `PAUSED`
* **Topic state changes**: When topics move to `FAULTED` state

> * **Throughput drops**: When bytes/records fetched drops significantly

Reviewer: Make sure to add Next steps at the end. You may want to link in this file to the [pre-disaster checklist](https://deploy-preview-1381--redpanda-docs-preview.netlify.app/current/deploy/redpanda/manual/resilience/emergency-shadowing/#pre-disaster-checklist)

// TODO: insert diagram. Possibly with a .gif animation showing cluster Cluster A being written and cluster B being replicated with a data flow arrow and geo-separation. Diagram must show Icons or labels for topics, configurations, offsets, ACLs, schemas that are being copied

== Limitations

Shadowing is designed for active-passive disaster recovery scenarios. Each shadow cluster can maintain only one shadow link.

Shadowing operates exclusively in asynchronous mode and doesn't support active-active configurations. This means there will always be some replication lag. You cannot write to both clusters simultaneously.

xref:develop:data-transforms/index.adoc[Data transforms] are disabled on shadow clusters while Shadowing is active. During a disaster, xref:manage:audit-logging.adoc[audit log] history from the source cluster is lost, though the shadow cluster begins generating new audit logs immediately after promotion.

> After you promote shadow topics with a failover, automatic fallback to the original source cluster is not supported. You cannot modify shadow topics through the Kafka API while Shadowing is active.

Reviewer 2: nit: You can modify topic properties of shadow topics, however we sould recommend against modifying any that are synced as those values will revert back to the source topic property value

If using xref:manage:security/authentication.adoc[authentication] for the shadow link connection, configure the source cluster with your chosen authentication method (SASL/SCRAM, TLS, mTLS) and ensure the shadow cluster has the proper credentials to authenticate to the source cluster.

== Set up Shadowing

To set up Shadowing:

* **Understand replication behavior**: Review what topic properties, consumer groups, and security settings Redpanda automatically replicates versus what requires explicit configuration
* **Configure filters**: Define which topics, consumer groups, and ACLs should replicate by creating include/exclude patterns that match your disaster recovery requirements
* **Create a shadow link**: Establish the connection between clusters using `rpk`, the Admin API, or Redpanda Console with authentication and network settings

== What gets replicated

Shadowing replicates your topic data with complete fidelity, preserving all message records with their original offsets, timestamps, headers, and metadata. The partition structure remains identical between source and shadow clusters, ensuring applications can resume processing from the exact same position after failover.

> Consumer group data flows according to your group filters, replicating offsets and membership information for matched groups. Security configurations including ACLs, user roles, and SCRAM credentials replicate based on your security filters, while Schema Registry data synchronizes schema definitions, versions, and compatibility settings.

Reviewer 2: We don't replicate user roles or SCRAM credentials

The following topic properties are always replicated:

> * `partition.count`

Reviewer 2: technically there is no `partition.count` property, i would recommend against putting this in a code block and just state "Parittion count"

* `max.message.bytes`
* `cleanup.policy`
* `message.timestamp.type`

The following topic properties are never replicated:

* `redpanda.remote.readreplica`
* `redpanda.remote.recovery`
* `redpanda.remote.allowgaps`
* `redpanda.virtual.cluster.id`
* `redpanda.leaders.preference`
* `redpanda.cloud_topic.enabled`

By default, Redpanda always syncs the following topic properties:

* `compression.type`
* `retention.bytes`
* `retention.ms`
* `delete.retention.ms`
* `replication.factor`
* `min.compaction.lag.ms`
* `max.compaction.lag.ms`

Additional topic properties are replicated only when you explicitly specify them in your `synced_shadow_topic_properties` configuration. Set `exclude_default` to `true` if you want to sync only the properties listed in `synced_shadow_topic_properties`. The filtering system you configure determines the precise scope of replication across all components, allowing you to balance comprehensive disaster recovery with operational efficiency.

=== Set filters

> Filters control exactly what data Shadowing replicates from your source cluster. You can define filters for topics, consumer groups, security settings, and ACLs to create a targeted disaster recovery scope rather than replicating everything.

Reviewer 2: I'd be careful with this wording irt topics.  The filters for topics are only for selecting which topics to _automatically create_ for shadwoing.  Once created, the only way to stop shadowing is to fail over the topic or delete it or delete the link

==== Filter types and patterns

Each filter uses two key settings:

* **Pattern type**: Determines how names are matched
  - `LITERAL`: Matches names exactly (including the special wildcard `*` to match all items)
  - `PREFIX`: Matches names that start with the specified string
* **Filter type**: Specifies whether to include or exclude matching items
  - `INCLUDE`: Replicate items that match the pattern
  - `EXCLUDE`: Skip items that match the pattern

==== Filter processing rules

Redpanda processes filters in the order you define them and applies the first matching rule. Design your filter lists carefully:

1. **Order matters**: Place more specific filters before general ones.

> 2. **First match wins**: After a name matches a filter, subsequent filters are ignored for that item.

Reviewer 2: exclude wins above all else

==== Common filtering patterns

**Replicate all topics except test topics:**
[,yaml]
----
auto_create_shadow_topic_filters:
  - pattern_type: "PREFIX"
    filter_type: "EXCLUDE" 
    name: "test-"
  - pattern_type: "LITERAL"
    filter_type: "INCLUDE"
    name: "*"
----

**Replicate only production topics:**
[,yaml]
----
auto_create_shadow_topic_filters:
  - pattern_type: "PREFIX"
    filter_type: "INCLUDE"
    name: "prod-"
  - pattern_type: "PREFIX" 
    filter_type: "INCLUDE"
    name: "production-"
----

**Replicate specific consumer groups:**
[,yaml]
----
group_filters:
  - pattern_type: "LITERAL"
    filter_type: "INCLUDE"
    name: "critical-app-consumers"
  - pattern_type: "PREFIX"
    filter_type: "INCLUDE" 
    name: "prod-consumer-"
----

==== System topic filtering rules

Redpanda system topics have specific filtering restrictions:

* Literal filters for `__consumer_offsets` and `_redpanda.audit_log` are rejected
* Prefix filters for topics starting with `_redpanda` or `__redpanda` are rejected  
* Wildcard `*` filters will not match topics that start with `_redpanda` or `__redpanda`

> * To shadow specific system topics, you must provide explicit literal filters for those individual topics

Reviewer 2: Maybe specifically if you want to shadow any topic that starts with `_redpanda` or `__redpanda` you must specify them literally

Reviewer 3: Wait I don't get that. Is this part. Is this right? "Prefix filters for topics starting with `_redpanda` or `__redpanda` are rejected " ? 

If yes, we can't shadow things that starts with `_redpanda` or `__redpanda` anyway. Literal or not.

Reviewer 2: Sorry let me clarify - if you specify a filter of type 'prefix' and value is either `_redpanda` or `__redpanda`, that filter will be rejected.  You can shadow topics starting with `_redpanda` or `__redpanda` if you specify them as a literal filter.

> ==== ACL filtering

Reviewer 2: I don't see any documentation about filtering for consumer groups

Reviewer 2: Additionally we should have a section about consumer groups and their behavior:

* If using CG's to consume data from the shadow cluster, users should NOT use the same group names as used on the source cluster - that won't break cluste rlinking but may have an impact on RPO/RTO as that will conflict with offsets being replicated
* Offset replication is "clamped" on commit - that means that when we pull CG offsets from the source cluster, if they are _above_ the HWM of the shadow partition, we clamp them to the HWM.

Reviewer 2: cc @mmaslankaprv if there's anything else I'm missing here

      access_filter:
        principal: "User:<USERNAME>"     # Principal name, example: "User:app-service"
        operation: "READ"                # Operation: "READ", "WRITE", "CREATE", "DELETE", "ALTER", "DESCRIBE", "ANY"
        permission_type: "ALLOW"         # Permission: "ALLOW" or "DENY"
        host: "<HOST_PATTERN>"           # Host pattern, examples: "*", "10.0.0.0/8", "app-server.example.com"
----
====

See also: link:/api/doc/admin/[Admin API v2 reference^]

== Failover

Failover is the process of promoting shadow topics or an entire shadow cluster from read-only replicas to fully writable resources. You can fail over individual topics for selective workload migration or fail over the entire cluster for comprehensive disaster recovery. This critical operation transforms your shadow resources into operational production assets, allowing you to redirect application traffic when the source cluster becomes unavailable.

=== Understanding failover behavior

When you initiate failover, Redpanda performs the following operations:

1. **Stops replication**: Halts all data fetching from the source cluster for the specified topics or entire shadow link

> 2. **Promotes topics**: Converts read-only shadow topics into regular, writable topics

Reviewer 2: Probably safe to just remove any reference to promotion and replace with failover or failedover

> 3. **Updates topic state**: Changes topic status from `ACTIVE` to `PROMOTING`, then `PROMOTED`

Reviewer 2: not promoting

failing-over to failed-over

**Complete shadow link failover (cluster failover):**
[,bash]
----
rpk shadow failover <my-disaster-recovery-link> --all
----

This promotes all shadow topics associated with the shadow link simultaneously, effectively failing over the entire cluster's replicated data. Use this approach during a complete regional disaster when you need to activate the entire shadow cluster as your new production environment.

=== Failover states

==== Shadow link states

The shadow link itself has a simple state model:

* **`ACTIVE`**: Shadow link is operating normally, replicating data
* **`PAUSED`**: Shadow link is temporarily stopped but not failed over

Shadow links do not have dedicated failover states. Instead, the link's operational status is determined by the collective state of its shadow topics.

==== Shadow topic states

Individual shadow topics progress through specific states during failover:

* **`ACTIVE`**: Normal replication state before failover
* **`FAILING_OVER`**: Failover initiated, replication stopping
* **`PROMOTING`**: Converting from shadow topic to regular topic

> * **`PROMOTED`**: Failover completed successfully, topic fully writable

Reviewer 2: change this

Reviewer 2: There are references to promotion in the proto but for clarify I'd just not include them

> = Shadowing

Reviewer: @paulohtb6 this is a very long page. For GA, I think you should make this a top-level conceptual topic (concepts only), then having separate pages for each task like setting up shadowing, Configuring failover, and monitoring shadowing.

:description: Set up disaster recovery for Redpanda clusters using Shadowing for cross-region replication.
:env-linux: true
:page-categories: Management, High Availability, Disaster Recovery

[NOTE]
====
include::shared:partial$enterprise-license.adoc[]
====

> Shadowing is Redpanda's enterprise-grade disaster recovery solution that establishes asynchronous, offset-preserving replication between two distinct Redpanda clusters. The replication stream ensures that the shadow cluster receives exact copies of the source cluster data, including offsets, timestamps, and cluster metadata. This creates a read-only shadow cluster that you can quickly failover to handle production traffic during a disaster.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Shadowing is Redpanda's enterprise-grade disaster recovery solution that establishes asynchronous, offset-preserving replication between two distinct Redpanda clusters. A cluster is able to create a dedicated client that continuously replicates source cluster data, including offsets, timestamps, and cluster metadata. This creates a read-only shadow cluster that you can quickly failover to handle production traffic during a disaster.
```
We hadn't introduced the concept of a replication stream, so I think this is a little clearer

[IMPORTANT]
====

> **Experiencing an active disaster?** See xref:deploy:redpanda/manual/resilience/emergency-shadowing.adoc[Emergency Shadowing Failover] for immediate step-by-step emergency procedures.

Reviewer: need to fix link with new name

====

> Unlike traditional replication tools that re-produce messages, Shadowing copies data at the byte level, ensuring shadow topics contain identical copies of source topics with preserved offsets and timestamps.

Reviewer 4: I like this sentence a lot.

Shadowing replicates:

* **Topic data**: All records with preserved offsets and timestamps
* **Topic configurations**: Partition counts, retention policies, and other xref:reference:properties/topic-properties.adoc[topic properties]
* **xref:develop:consume-data/consumer-offsets.adoc[Consumer group offsets]**: Enables seamless consumer resumption after failover
* **Access Control Lists (ACLs)**: User permissions and security policies
* **xref:manage:schema-reg/schema-reg-overview.adoc[Schema Registry] data**: Schema definitions and compatibility settings

== How Shadowing fits into disaster recovery

Shadowing addresses enterprise disaster recovery requirements driven by regulatory compliance and business continuity needs. Organizations typically want to minimize both recovery time objective (RTO) and recovery point objective (RPO), and Shadowing asynchronous replication helps you achieve both goals by reducing data loss during regional outages and enabling rapid application recovery.

> The architecture follows an active-standby pattern. The source cluster processes all production traffic while the shadow cluster remains in read-only mode, continuously receiving updates. If a disaster occurs, you can failover the shadow topics using the Admin API or `rpk`, making them fully writable. At that point, you can redirect your applications to the shadow cluster, which becomes the new production cluster.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The architecture follows an active-passive pattern. The source cluster processes all production traffic while the shadow cluster remains in read-only mode, continuously receiving updates. If a disaster occurs, you can failover the shadow topics using the Admin API or `rpk`, making them fully writable. At that point, you can redirect your applications to the shadow cluster, which becomes the new production cluster.
``` 
It's a bit of a gray area, but I think we are active-passive rather than active-standby. The main reason is that the shadow cluster is not doing any processing (data transforms are not synced). The design also allows for distinct versions to be run, which is not usually the case with active/standby architectures.

> Shadowing complements Redpanda's existing availability and recovery capabilities. xref:deploy:redpanda/manual/high-availability.adoc[High availability] actively protects your day-to-day operations, handling reads and writes seamlessly during node or availability zone failures within a region. Shadowing is your insurance policy for catastrophic regional disasters. While xref:manage:whole-cluster-restore.adoc[Whole Cluster Restore] provides point-in-time recovery from xref:manage:tiered-storage.adoc[Tiered Storage], Shadowing delivers real-time, cross-region replication for mission-critical applications that require rapid failover with minimal data loss.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Shadowing complements Redpanda's existing availability and recovery capabilities. xref:deploy:redpanda/manual/high-availability.adoc[High availability] actively protects your day-to-day operations, handling reads and writes seamlessly during node or availability zone failures within a region. Shadowing is your safety net for catastrophic regional disasters. While xref:manage:whole-cluster-restore.adoc[Whole Cluster Restore] provides point-in-time recovery from xref:manage:tiered-storage.adoc[Tiered Storage], Shadowing delivers near real-time, cross-region replication for mission-critical applications that require rapid failover with minimal data loss.
```
An insurance policy pays out damages, a safety net keeps people from getting hurt :)
I don't think we can claim real-time...

// TODO: insert diagram. Possibly with a .gif animation showing cluster Cluster A being written and cluster B being replicated with a data flow arrow and geo-separation. Diagram must show Icons or labels for topics, configurations, offsets, ACLs, schemas that are being copied

== Limitations

Shadowing is designed for active-passive disaster recovery scenarios. Each shadow cluster can maintain only one shadow link.

Shadowing operates exclusively in asynchronous mode and doesn't support active-active configurations. This means there will always be some replication lag. You cannot write to both clusters simultaneously.

xref:develop:data-transforms/index.adoc[Data transforms] are disabled on shadow clusters while Shadowing is active. During a disaster, xref:manage:audit-logging.adoc[audit log] history from the source cluster is lost, though the shadow cluster begins generating new audit logs immediately after the failover.

After you failover shadow topics, automatic fallback to the original source cluster is not supported.

[CAUTION]
====
Do not modify synced topic properties on shadow topics. These properties revert to source topic values.
====

== Prerequisites

> === Licensing and cluster requirements

Reviewer: ```suggestion
=== License and cluster requirements
```

- You must have xref:get-started:licensing/overview.adoc[Enterprise Edition] licenses on both clusters. 

> - Both clusters must be running Redpanda v25.3 or later. The shadow cluster can be one feature release ahead of the source cluster, but cannot skip feature releases. For example, if the source cluster runs v25.3, the shadow cluster can run v25.3 or v26.1, but not v27.1.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- Both clusters must be running Redpanda v25.3 or later. 
```
Since we don't have 26.1 yet, I don't think it's worth mentioning this capability. We need to test it before we assert it in the docs. We might run into version incompatibility.

* **Consumer groups**: `describe` and `read` permission on consumer groups for offset replication
* **ACLs**: `describe` permission on ACL resources to replicate security policies
* **Cluster**: `describe` permission on the cluster resource to access ACLs

This service account authenticates from the shadow cluster to the source cluster and performs the actual data replication. The credentials for this account are provided when you set up the shadow link.

=== Network and authentication

You must configure network connectivity between clusters with appropriate firewall rules to allow the shadow cluster to connect to the source cluster for data replication. Shadowing uses a pull-based architecture where the shadow cluster fetches data from the source cluster.

If using xref:manage:security/authentication.adoc[authentication] for the shadow link connection, configure the source cluster with your chosen authentication method (SASL/SCRAM, TLS, mTLS) and ensure the shadow cluster has the proper credentials to authenticate to the source cluster.

== Set up Shadowing

To set up Shadowing:

> * **Understand replication behavior**: Before you set up Shadowing, review what topic properties, consumer groups, and security settings Redpanda automatically replicates versus what requires explicit configuration

Reviewer 4: Do we need this?

Reviewer 3: removing..

[,yaml]
----
auto_create_shadow_topic_filters:
  - pattern_type: "PREFIX"
    filter_type: "EXCLUDE" 
    name: "test-"
  - pattern_type: "LITERAL"
    filter_type: "INCLUDE"
    name: "*"
----

**Replicate only production topics:**
[,yaml]
----
auto_create_shadow_topic_filters:
  - pattern_type: "PREFIX"
    filter_type: "INCLUDE"
    name: "prod-"
  - pattern_type: "PREFIX" 
    filter_type: "INCLUDE"
    name: "production-"
----

**Replicate specific consumer groups:**
[,yaml]
----
group_filters:
  - pattern_type: "LITERAL"
    filter_type: "INCLUDE"
    name: "critical-app-consumers"
  - pattern_type: "PREFIX"
    filter_type: "INCLUDE" 
    name: "prod-consumer-"
----

==== System topic filtering rules

Redpanda system topics have specific filtering restrictions:

* Literal filters for `__consumer_offsets` and `_redpanda.audit_log` are rejected.
* Prefix filters for topics starting with `_redpanda` or `__redpanda` are rejected.  
* Wildcard `*` filters will not match topics that start with `_redpanda` or `__redpanda`.
* To shadow specific system topics, you must provide explicit literal filters for those individual topics.

==== ACL filtering

> ACL filters are more complex as they filter based on both resource and access properties:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
By default all ACLs are replicated. This is recommended in order to ensure that your shadow cluster has the same permissions as your source cluster. ACL filters should be used with care:
```

      operation: "READ"
      permission_type: "ALLOW" 
      host: "*"
  # Include consumer group permissions
  - resource_filter:
      resource_type: "GROUP"
      pattern_type: "LITERAL"
      name: "*"
    access_filter:
      principal: "User:app-user" 
      operation: "READ"
      permission_type: "ALLOW"
      host: "*"
----

==== Generate a sample configuration

Use `rpk` to generate a sample configuration file with common filter patterns:

[,bash]
----
rpk shadow config generate --output shadow-link-config.yaml
----

This creates a template configuration file that you can customize for your environment.

=== Networking

Configure network connectivity between your source and shadow clusters to enable shadow link replication. The shadow cluster initiates connections to the source cluster using a pull-based architecture.

==== Connection requirements

* **Direction**: Shadow cluster connects to source cluster (outbound from shadow, inbound to source)
* **Protocol**: Kafka protocol over TCP (default port 9092, or your configured listener ports)
* **Persistence**: Connections remain active for continuous replication

==== Firewall configuration

> Configure firewall rules to allow the shadow cluster to reach the source cluster:

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
You must configure firewall rules to allow the shadow cluster to reach the source cluster.
```

    - pattern_type: "LITERAL"
      filter_type: "INCLUDE"
      name: "<ROLE_NAME>"                # Examples: "application-user", "read-only"
  scram_cred_filters:                    # Filters for SCRAM credentials to sync
    - pattern_type: "PREFIX"
      filter_type: "EXCLUDE"
      name: "<ADMIN_PREFIX>"             # Examples: "admin-", "root-"
  acl_filters:                           # Filters for ACLs to sync
    - resource_filter:
        resource_type: "TOPIC"           # Resource type: "TOPIC", "GROUP", "CLUSTER"
        pattern_type: "PREFIX"           # Pattern type: "LITERAL", "PREFIX", "PREFIXED"
        name: "<RESOURCE_PATTERN>"       # Examples: "prod-", "app-data-"
      access_filter:
        principal: "User:<USERNAME>"     # Principal name, example: "User:app-service"
        operation: "READ"                # Operation: "READ", "WRITE", "CREATE", "DELETE", "ALTER", "DESCRIBE", "ANY"
        permission_type: "ALLOW"         # Permission: "ALLOW" or "DENY"
        host: "<HOST_PATTERN>"           # Host pattern, examples: "*", "10.0.0.0/8", "app-server.example.com"
----
====

See also: link:/api/doc/admin/[Admin API v2 reference^]

== Failover

> Failover is the process of failing shadow topics or an entire shadow cluster from read-only replicas to fully writable resources. You can fail over individual topics for selective workload migration or fail over the entire cluster for comprehensive disaster recovery. This critical operation transforms your shadow resources into operational production assets, allowing you to redirect application traffic when the source cluster becomes unavailable.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Failover is the process of modifying shadow topics or an entire shadow cluster from read-only replicas to fully writable resources, and ceasing replication from the source cluster. You can fail over individual topics for selective workload migration or fail over the entire cluster for comprehensive disaster recovery. This critical operation transforms your shadow resources into operational production assets, allowing you to redirect application traffic when the source cluster becomes unavailable.
```

> === Understanding failover behavior

Reviewer 5: Back in the day, we were discouraged from using this type of heading, as it was thought that "Understanding" is a bit of a psuedo-task. Perhaps just use: Failover behavior?

When you initiate failover, Redpanda performs the following operations:

1. **Stops replication**: Halts all data fetching from the source cluster for the specified topics or entire shadow link

> 2. **Failedover topics**: Converts read-only shadow topics into regular, writable topics

Reviewer 5: should this be Failover topics?

> 2. **Failedover topics**: Converts read-only shadow topics into regular, writable topics

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
2. **Failover topics**: Converts read-only shadow topics into regular, writable topics
```

3. **Updates topic state**: Changes topic status from `ACTIVE` to `FAILING_OVER`, then `FAILED_OVER`

> The failover process is irreversible. After topics are failedover, they cannot return to shadow mode, and automatic fallback to the original source cluster is not supported.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
The failover process is irreversible. After a failover, topics cannot return to shadow mode, and automatic fallback to the original source cluster is not supported.
```

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Topic failover is irreversible. Once failed over, topics cannot return to shadow mode, and automatic fallback to the original source cluster is not supported.
```

=== Failover granularity options

You can perform failover at two levels of granularity:

**Individual topic failover:**
[,bash]
----
rpk shadow failover <my-disaster-recovery-link> --topic prod-orders
----

> This failsover only the specified shadow topic while leaving other topics in the shadow link still replicating. Use this approach when you need to selectively failover specific workloads or when testing failover procedures.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
This failover applies only to the specified shadow topic, while leaving other topics in the shadow link still replicating. Use this approach when you need to selectively failover specific workloads or when testing failover procedures.
```

**Complete shadow link failover (cluster failover):**
[,bash]
----
rpk shadow failover <my-disaster-recovery-link> --all
----

> This failsover all shadow topics associated with the shadow link simultaneously, effectively failing over the entire cluster's replicated data. Use this approach during a complete regional disaster when you need to activate the entire shadow cluster as your new production environment.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
This failover applies to all shadow topics associated with the shadow link simultaneously, effectively failing over the entire cluster's replicated data. Use this approach during a complete regional disaster when you need to activate the entire shadow cluster as your new production environment.
```

**Force delete shadow link (emergency failover):**
[,bash]
----
rpk shadow delete <my-disaster-recovery-link> --force
----

> Force deleting a shadow link immediately failsover all topics in the link, bypassing the normal failover state transitions. Use this approach only when topics are stuck in transitional states and you need immediate access to all replicated data.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Force deleting a shadow link immediately triggers a failover of all topics in the link, bypassing the normal failover state transitions. Use this approach only when topics are stuck in transitional states and you need immediate access to all replicated data.
```

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Force deleting a shadow link immediately fails over all topics in the link, bypassing the normal failover state transitions. Use this approach only when topics are stuck in transitional states and you need immediate access to all replicated data.
```

[WARNING]
====

> Force deleting a shadow link is irreversible and immediately failsover all topics. This should only be used as a last resort when normal failover procedures fail.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Force deleting a shadow link is irreversible and immediately triggers a failover of all topics. This should only be used as a last resort when normal failover procedures fail.
```

====

=== Failover states

==== Shadow link states

The shadow link itself has a simple state model:

* **`ACTIVE`**: Shadow link is operating normally, replicating data

Shadow links do not have dedicated failover states. Instead, the link's operational status is determined by the collective state of its shadow topics.

==== Shadow topic states

Individual shadow topics progress through specific states during failover:

* **`ACTIVE`**: Normal replication state before failover
* **`FAILING_OVER`**: Failover initiated, replication stopping
* **`FAILED_OVER`**: Failover completed successfully, topic fully writable

> ==== Monitoring failover progress

Reviewer: ```suggestion
==== Monitor failover progress
```

Monitor failover progress using the status command:

[,bash]
----
rpk shadow status <my-disaster-recovery-link>
----

The output shows individual topic states and any issues encountered during the failover process.

=== Post-failover cluster behavior

After successful failover, your shadow cluster exhibits the following characteristics:

**Topic accessibility:**

> * Failedover topics become fully writable and readable.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* Failed over topics become fully writable and readable.
```
rpk reported state is "FAILED_OVER", so we should add the space

**Operational limitations:**

* No automatic fallback mechanism to the original source cluster.
* Data transforms remain disabled until you manually re-enable them.
* Audit log history from the source cluster is not available (new audit logs begin immediately).

=== Failover considerations and limitations

**Data consistency:**

* Some data loss may occur due to replication lag at the time of failover.
* Consumer group offsets are preserved, allowing applications to resume from their last committed position.
* In-flight transactions at the source cluster are not replicated and will be lost.

**Recovery-point-objective (RPO):**

The amount of potential data loss depends on replication lag when disaster occurs. Monitor lag metrics to understand your effective RPO.

**Network partitions:**

If the source cluster becomes accessible again after failover, do not attempt to write to both clusters simultaneously. This creates a scenario with potential data inconsistencies, since metadata starts to diverge.

**Testing requirements:**

Regularly test failover procedures in non-production environments to validate your disaster recovery processes and measure RTO.

> == Monitoring

Reviewer: ```suggestion
== Monitor Shadowing
```

Monitor your shadow links to ensure proper replication performance and understand your disaster recovery readiness. Use `rpk` commands, metrics, and status information to track shadow link health and troubleshoot issues.

=== Status commands

List existing shadow links:

[,bash]
----
rpk shadow list
----

Check your shadow link status to ensure proper operation:

[,bash]
----
rpk shadow status <my-disaster-recovery-link>
----

This displays replication lag, connection health, and the status of individual synchronization tasks. The status output includes:

* **Shadow link state**: Overall operational state (`ACTIVE`)
* **Individual topic states**: Current state of each replicated topic
* **Task status**: Health of replication tasks across brokers

> * **Lag information**: Replication lag per partition

Reviewer 5: Once working in rpk, can you pull in actual output that maps to the various statuses shown here?

|`redpanda_shadow_link_shadow_topic_state`
|Gauge
|Number of shadow topics in the respective states. Labeled by `shadow_link_name` and `state` to monitor topic state distribution across your shadow links.

|`redpanda_shadow_link_total_records_fetched`
|Count
|The total number of records fetched by the sharded replicator (records received by the client). Monitor by `shadow_link_name` and `shard` to track message throughput from the source.

|`redpanda_shadow_link_total_records_written`
|Count
|The total number of records written by a sharded replicator (records written to the write_at_offset_stm). Uses `shadow_link_name` and `shard` labels to monitor message throughput to the shadow cluster.
|===

See also: xref:reference:public-metrics-reference.adoc[]

=== Monitoring best practices

==== Health check procedures

Establish regular monitoring workflows to ensure shadow link health:

**Health checks:**
[,bash]
----
# Check all shadow links are active
rpk shadow list | grep -v "ACTIVE" || echo "All shadow links healthy"

# Monitor lag for critical topics  
rpk shadow status <disaster-recovery-link> | grep -E "LAG|Lag"
----

> ==== Alerting thresholds

Reviewer: ```suggestion
==== Alert thresholds
```

= Shadowing
:description: Set up disaster recovery for Redpanda clusters using Shadowing for cross-region replication.
:env-linux: true
:page-categories: Management, High Availability, Disaster Recovery

[NOTE]
====
include::shared:partial$enterprise-license.adoc[]
====

> Shadowing is Redpanda's enterprise-grade disaster recovery solution that establishes asynchronous, offset-preserving replication between two distinct Redpanda clusters. The replication stream ensures that the shadow cluster receives exact copies of the source cluster data, including offsets, timestamps, and cluster metadata. This creates a read-only shadow cluster that you can quickly promote to handle production traffic during a disaster.

Reviewer 6: It works with Kafka too (which is one of the goals of the project), not sure if the wording is intentional.

edit: after reading further it appears that we are only documenting the requirements for 25.3, perhaps the wording should indicate they are of temporary nature somehow and will be lifted in the subsequent versions. In this case we envision this to be a migration tool too, so soon-ish users will be able to run this against Kafka.

Reviewer 3: Similar to https://github.com/redpanda-data/docs/pull/1381#discussion_r2440442549 we want to document what's out there today.

> [IMPORTANT]

Reviewer: Might look better to keep the admonition but change **IMPORTANT** to **Experiencing an active disaster** as the heading; e.g., see [here](url)

====
**Experiencing an active disaster?** See xref:deploy:redpanda/manual/resilience/emergency-shadowing.adoc[Emergency Shadowing Failover] for immediate step-by-step emergency procedures.
====

Unlike traditional replication tools that re-produce messages, Shadowing copies data at the byte level, ensuring shadow topics contain identical copies of source topics with preserved offsets and timestamps.

Shadowing replicates:

> 

Reviewer: I'd like to limit links to only what is necessary or helpful; i.e., if users don't know anything about consumer offsets or schema registry, then I think they should search for info, because a link here just distracts them away from the reason they're on this page

* **Topic data**: All records with preserved offsets and timestamps
* **Topic configurations**: Partition counts, retention policies, and other xref:reference:properties/topic-properties.adoc[topic properties]
* **xref:develop:consume-data/consumer-offsets.adoc[Consumer group offsets]**: Enables seamless consumer resumption after failover
* **Access Control Lists (ACLs)**: User permissions and security policies
* **xref:manage:schema-reg/schema-reg-overview.adoc[Schema Registry] data**: Schema definitions and compatibility settings

== How Shadowing fits into disaster recovery

> Shadowing addresses enterprise disaster recovery requirements driven by regulatory compliance and business continuity needs. Organizations typically want to minimize both recovery time objective (RTO) and recovery point objective (RPO), and Shadowing asynchronous replication helps you achieve both goals by reducing data loss during regional outages and enabling rapid application recovery.

Reviewer 5: Please add either a link to definitions, or glossary definition for RPO and RTO

> The architecture follows an active-standby pattern. The source cluster processes all production traffic while the shadow cluster remains in read-only mode, continuously receiving updates. If a disaster occurs, you can promote the shadow topics using the Admin API or `rpk`, making them fully writable. At that point, you can redirect your applications to the shadow cluster, which becomes the new production cluster.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Redpanda's disaster recovery architecture follows an active-standby pattern. The source cluster processes all production traffic while the shadow cluster remains in read-only mode, continuously receiving updates. If a disaster occurs, you can promote the shadow topics using the Admin API or `rpk`, making them fully writable. At that point, you can redirect your applications to the shadow cluster, which becomes the new production cluster.
```

Shadowing complements Redpanda's existing availability and recovery capabilities. xref:deploy:redpanda/manual/high-availability.adoc[High availability] actively protects your day-to-day operations, handling reads and writes seamlessly during node or availability zone failures within a region. Shadowing is your insurance policy for catastrophic regional disasters.

> While xref:manage:whole-cluster-restore.adoc[Whole Cluster Restore] provides point-in-time recovery from xref:manage:tiered-storage.adoc[Tiered Storage], Shadowing delivers real-time, cross-region replication for mission-critical applications that require rapid failover with minimal data loss.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Shadowing complements Redpanda's existing availability and recovery capabilities. xref:deploy:redpanda/manual/high-availability.adoc[High availability] actively protects your day-to-day operations, handling reads and writes seamlessly during node or availability zone failures within a region. Shadowing is your insurance policy for catastrophic regional disasters. While xref:manage:whole-cluster-restore.adoc[Whole Cluster Restore] provides point-in-time recovery from xref:manage:tiered-storage.adoc[Tiered Storage], Shadowing delivers real-time, cross-region replication for mission-critical applications that require rapid failover with minimal data loss.
```

// TODO: insert diagram. Possibly with a .gif animation showing cluster Cluster A being written and cluster B being replicated with a data flow arrow and geo-separation. Diagram must show Icons or labels for topics, configurations, offsets, ACLs, schemas that are being copied

== Limitations

Shadowing is designed for active-passive disaster recovery scenarios. Each shadow cluster can maintain only one shadow link.

Shadowing operates exclusively in asynchronous mode and doesn't support active-active configurations. This means there will always be some replication lag. You cannot write to both clusters simultaneously.

xref:develop:data-transforms/index.adoc[Data transforms] are disabled on shadow clusters while Shadowing is active. During a disaster, xref:manage:audit-logging.adoc[audit log] history from the source cluster is lost, though the shadow cluster begins generating new audit logs immediately after promotion.

> After you promote shadow topics with a failover, automatic fallback to the original source cluster is not supported. 

Reviewer 6: Some of the limitations are temporary. For example "only one shadow link", "automatic fallback to the original source cluster is not supported. ",  perhaps the wording should convey the temporary nature of these limitations.

Reviewer 3: In docs we mostly document what's available today. We don't make commitmentsfor future releases. Whenever those limitations are lifted from core, we can revisit that and remove from that list.

> [INFO]

Reviewer 5: I've not come across this Info note format in our docs. It lacks specificity--is it a tip? Important reminder? Caution? Or just a run-of-the mill note (pay particular attention to this point)? Consider another note type so users clearly understand context/importance.

====

> Redpanda Data recommends that you don't modify synced topic properties on shadow topics. These properties revert to the source topic values.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[CAUTION]
====
Do not modify synced topic properties on shadow topics. These properties revert to source topic values.
```

====

== Prerequisites

=== Licensing and cluster requirements

- You must have xref:get-started:licensing/overview.adoc[Enterprise Edition] licenses on both clusters. 

> - Both clusters must run Redpanda version 25.3 or later. The shadow cluster can be one feature release ahead of the source cluster, but cannot skip feature releases. For example, if the source cluster runs version 25.3, the shadow cluster can run 25.3 or 26.1, but not 27.1.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
- Both clusters must be running Redpanda v25.3 or later. The shadow cluster can be one feature release ahead of the source cluster, but cannot skip feature releases. For example, if the source cluster runs v25.3, the shadow cluster can run v25.3 or v26.1, but not v27.1.
```

* **Consumer groups**: `describe` and `read` permission on consumer groups for offset replication
* **ACLs**: `describe` permission on ACL resources to replicate security policies
* **Cluster**: `describe` permission on the cluster resource to access ACLs

This service account authenticates from the shadow cluster to the source cluster and performs the actual data replication. The credentials for this account are provided when you set up the shadow link.

=== Network and authentication

You must configure network connectivity between clusters with appropriate firewall rules to allow the shadow cluster to connect to the source cluster for data replication. Shadowing uses a pull-based architecture where the shadow cluster fetches data from the source cluster.

If using xref:manage:security/authentication.adoc[authentication] for the shadow link connection, configure the source cluster with your chosen authentication method (SASL/SCRAM, TLS, mTLS) and ensure the shadow cluster has the proper credentials to authenticate to the source cluster.

== Set up Shadowing

To set up Shadowing:

> * **Understand replication behavior**: Review what topic properties, consumer groups, and security settings Redpanda automatically replicates versus what requires explicit configuration

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
* **Understand replication behavior**: Before you set up Shadowing, review what topic properties, consumer groups, and security settings Redpanda automatically replicates versus what requires explicit configuration
```

> * **Configure filters**: Define which topics, consumer groups, and ACLs should replicate by creating include/exclude patterns that match your disaster recovery requirements

Reviewer 5: Link to "Set filters" below.

> * **Create a shadow link**: Establish the connection between clusters using `rpk`, the Admin API, or Redpanda Console with authentication and network settings

Reviewer 5: Link to this task below

The following topic properties are always replicated:

* Partition count
* `max.message.bytes`
* `cleanup.policy`
* `message.timestamp.type`

The following topic properties are never replicated:

* `redpanda.remote.readreplica`
* `redpanda.remote.recovery`
* `redpanda.remote.allowgaps`
* `redpanda.virtual.cluster.id`
* `redpanda.leaders.preference`
* `redpanda.cloud_topic.enabled`

By default, Redpanda always syncs the following topic properties:

* `compression.type`
* `retention.bytes`
* `retention.ms`
* `delete.retention.ms`
* `replication.factor`
* `min.compaction.lag.ms`
* `max.compaction.lag.ms`

Additional topic properties are replicated only when you explicitly specify them in your `synced_shadow_topic_properties` configuration. Set `exclude_default` to `true` if you want to sync only the properties listed in `synced_shadow_topic_properties`. The filtering system you configure determines the precise scope of replication across all components, allowing you to balance comprehensive disaster recovery with operational efficiency.

=== Set filters

Filters determine which resources Shadowing automatically creates when establishing your shadow link.

> Topic filters select which topics Shadowing automatically creates as shadow topics when they appear on the source cluster. Once Shadowing creates a shadow topic, it continues replicating until you fail over the topic, delete it, or delete the entire shadow link.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Topic filters select which topics Shadowing automatically creates as shadow topics when they appear on the source cluster. Once Shadowing creates a shadow topic, it continues replicating until you failover the topic, delete it, or delete the entire shadow link.
```

Consumer group and ACL filters control which groups and security policies replicate to maintain application functionality.

==== Filter types and patterns

Each filter uses two key settings:

* **Pattern type**: Determines how names are matched
  - `LITERAL`: Matches names exactly (including the special wildcard `*` to match all items)
  - `PREFIX`: Matches names that start with the specified string
* **Filter type**: Specifies whether to include or exclude matching items
  - `INCLUDE`: Replicate items that match the pattern
  - `EXCLUDE`: Skip items that match the pattern

==== Filter processing rules

> Redpanda processes filters in the order you define them with exclude filters taking precedence. Design your filter lists carefully:

Reviewer 5: Below you use INCLUDE and EXCLUDE, ^^ and here you use lowercase. The context seems more or less the same, so I think they should all be written the same. Whatever you decide to go with, just be consistent.

1. **Exclude filters win**: If any EXCLUDE filter matches a resource, it is excluded regardless of INCLUDE filters
2. **Order matters for includes**: Among INCLUDE filters, the first match determines the result
3. **Default behavior**: Items that don't match any filter are excluded from replication

==== Common filtering patterns

**Replicate all topics except test topics:**
[,yaml]
----
auto_create_shadow_topic_filters:
  - pattern_type: "PREFIX"
    filter_type: "EXCLUDE" 
    name: "test-"
  - pattern_type: "LITERAL"
    filter_type: "INCLUDE"
    name: "*"
----

**Replicate only production topics:**
[,yaml]
----
auto_create_shadow_topic_filters:
  - pattern_type: "PREFIX"
    filter_type: "INCLUDE"
    name: "prod-"
  - pattern_type: "PREFIX" 
    filter_type: "INCLUDE"
    name: "production-"
----

**Replicate specific consumer groups:**
[,yaml]
----
group_filters:
  - pattern_type: "LITERAL"
    filter_type: "INCLUDE"
    name: "critical-app-consumers"
  - pattern_type: "PREFIX"
    filter_type: "INCLUDE" 
    name: "prod-consumer-"
----

==== System topic filtering rules

> Redpanda system topics have specific filtering restrictions:

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Redpanda system topics have the following specific filtering restrictions:
```

    - pattern_type: "LITERAL"
      filter_type: "INCLUDE"
      name: "<ROLE_NAME>"                # Examples: "application-user", "read-only"
  scram_cred_filters:                    # Filters for SCRAM credentials to sync
    - pattern_type: "PREFIX"
      filter_type: "EXCLUDE"
      name: "<ADMIN_PREFIX>"             # Examples: "admin-", "root-"
  acl_filters:                           # Filters for ACLs to sync
    - resource_filter:
        resource_type: "TOPIC"           # Resource type: "TOPIC", "GROUP", "CLUSTER"
        pattern_type: "PREFIX"           # Pattern type: "LITERAL", "PREFIX", "PREFIXED"
        name: "<RESOURCE_PATTERN>"       # Examples: "prod-", "app-data-"
      access_filter:
        principal: "User:<USERNAME>"     # Principal name, example: "User:app-service"
        operation: "READ"                # Operation: "READ", "WRITE", "CREATE", "DELETE", "ALTER", "DESCRIBE", "ANY"
        permission_type: "ALLOW"         # Permission: "ALLOW" or "DENY"
        host: "<HOST_PATTERN>"           # Host pattern, examples: "*", "10.0.0.0/8", "app-server.example.com"
----
====

See also: link:/api/doc/admin/[Admin API v2 reference^]

> == Failover

Reviewer 5: Add your note from the beginning of the doc here--users don't always read from start to finish, and we wouldn't want them to miss it:

Experiencing an active disaster? See [Emergency Shadowing Failover](https://deploy-preview-1381--redpanda-docs-preview.netlify.app/current/deploy/redpanda/manual/resilience/shadowing/#deploy:redpanda/manual/resilience/emergency-shadowing.adoc) for immediate step-by-step emergency procedures.

**Complete shadow link failover (cluster failover):**
[,bash]
----
rpk shadow failover <my-disaster-recovery-link> --all
----

This promotes all shadow topics associated with the shadow link simultaneously, effectively failing over the entire cluster's replicated data. Use this approach during a complete regional disaster when you need to activate the entire shadow cluster as your new production environment.

**Force delete shadow link (emergency failover):**
[,bash]
----
rpk shadow delete <my-disaster-recovery-link> --force
----

Force deleting a shadow link immediately promotes all topics in the link, bypassing the normal failover state transitions. Use this approach only when topics are stuck in transitional states and you need immediate access to all replicated data.

[WARNING]
====
Force deleting a shadow link is irreversible and immediately promotes all topics. This should only be used as a last resort when normal failover procedures fail.
====

=== Failover states

==== Shadow link states

The shadow link itself has a simple state model:

* **`ACTIVE`**: Shadow link is operating normally, replicating data

> * **`PAUSED`**: Shadow link is temporarily stopped but not failed over

Reviewer 6: PAUSED is not implemented (yet), wonder if we should remove this for now.
